http://www.wired.com/2016/03/6-chrome-extensions-thatll-keep-sane-election-year/
6 Chrome Extensions That'll Keep You Sane This Election Year
Brian Barrett
March 1, 2016
7:00 am
This past weekend, the merrymakers at <em>Last Week Tonight</em> introduced a novel Chrome extension that changes every mention of “Donald Trump” to “Donald Drumpf,” his original ancestral surname. It’s fun! You should install it, along with these other politically minded Internet add-ons that will help you make it to November with your sanity intact.
The Internet is filled with junk any given year, but election years are especially overrun with political flotsam, whether it’s your cousin’s Facebook rantings or a surprise Google result. You can’t (and probably shouldn’t, given the social contract and all) tune it out entirely, but you can at least have a little fun with it. If you use Chrome as your browser, which you almost certainly should, you can install all kinds of upgrades that give the Internet’s political yammering some fun little twists.
As mentioned above, Drumpfinator makes America Drumpf again by turning any mention of Donald Trump into Donald Drumpf. It’s simple, it’s silly, and it may help you see the GOP’s leading candidate in a whole new lightpf.
I know, I know, you’re wondering what DC’s favorite post-hardcore band has to do with the 2016 election cycle. The answer is nothing at all! It’s a slightly reductive name for an extension that replaces all mentions of “Benghazi” with “Fugazi.” That’s it. And if you think you don’t have much use for it now, just wait until the GOP stops attacking each other and turns on Hillary Clinton (if she does turn out to be the nominee for the Dems) instead.
If you’re not that into politics—or <em>really</em> into politics but can’t stand politicians—you might enjoy this extension, which takes any presidential candidate’s name and transforms it into a poop emoji. And yes, it’s bipartisan; Ted Cruz and Bernie Sanders are equally poop in PtP’s eyes.
Facebook Reactions are a fun way to push beyond a mere Like. But when you want to push beyond a mere Reaction, you can simply replace Facebook’s cartoonish emoji with emotive images of either Donald Trump or Bernie Sanders. Keep in mind that this won’t actually plop an anti-establishment candidate’s face in anyone’s News Feed, but it’s aces for keeping yourself entertained.
Already experiencing election year overload? Here’s your nuclear option. This extension filters out campaign-related stories altogether from sites like Twitter, Facebook, Slate, <em>the New York Times</em>, Huffington Post, and <em>the Atlantic</em>, among others. It also comes with advanced features, like a snooze bar, toggling filters on and off, and the ability to add additional terms to your do-not-want list.
