http://www.wired.com/2016/02/unicorn-last-thing-web-2-0-survivor-wants/
A Unicorn Is the Last Thing This Web 2.0 Survivor Wants
Jessi Hempel
February 29, 2016
11:00 am
Gina Bianchini knows what it’s like to helm an ailing unicorn. She’s done it, and she’s learned some crucial lessons—the hard way.
In 2005, Bianchini and her high-profile cofounder Marc Andreessen launched Ning. It was among a half-dozen social software companies—Facebook, MySpace, LinkedIn, Bebo—that were experiencing off-the-charts user growth at the time. Over the next few years, Bianchini became social media’s it-girl.<em> Fast Company</em> had paid $850 million for Bebo, it almost didn’t seem crazy.
Then growth stalled. People who had bet there would be room for more than one dominant social network changed their minds as more than half-a-billion people signed on to Facebook. In the spring of 2010, Bianchini left Ning. The new CEO fired 40 percent of the workforce and made users pay up to maintain their Ning social networks. A year later, he sold the company to the online publisher and ad network Glam Media (now called Mode) for $150 million in an all-stock deal. Andreessen, who remained chairman through the sale, rarely talks about Ning; in a recent extensive <em>New Yorker</em> profile of the famed investor, the startup wasn’t even mentioned.
After Ning, Bianchini was forced to do some soul-searching. As a 1994 Stanford graduate with a sharp intellect and contagious enthusiasm, Bianchini has long had a reputation in tech circles for helping others puzzle through gnarly professional problems. She had to turn that attention on herself. “I had to look myself in the mirror and say, why am I an entrepreneur? What’s my mission?” she says.
It didn’t take long for that to become clear. As one of the small handful of founders building the first round of Web 2.0 companies, Bianchini knew social—both what people wanted to do online, and what products helped them do it—better than just about anyone else. And entrepreneurship, for her, was as much as calling as a profession. By late 2011, she’d launched her first public experiment under the name Mightybell. Engineer Matteo Melani joined her as a cofounder to build software for niche social networks—Ning, but better.
This time, however, she took a very different approach. To start, she raised just $2 million, adding another $4 million from seed investors like Floodgate, First Round, and Cowboy Ventures. For several years, as her team built out Mightybell’s software, she didn’t do much outreach to the press. Instead, she kept her team to fewer than ten people and built a profitable business by making software people needed and selling it to them. It wasn’t sexy—but it was effective. As the current unicorns—from Dropbox to Snapchat—grapple with skyrocketing burn rates and build out expensive enterprise salesforces to help them grow into their valuations, Bianchini is adding customers and banking revenues. “The nice thing about revenue is it’s not diluted capital,” she says.
There are many companies competing to offer social software, from Facebook and LinkedIn to Asana and Slack. Bianchini has hit upon a niche none of them currently fill—helping companies and entrepreneurs build out social networks around special interests. The idea began to gain traction in 2013 when Mightybell powered the launch of Sheryl Sandberg’s Lean In Circles. From there, American Express, The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, and Intuit QuickBooks approached her and the company to create niche social networks for their customers — small business owners, the self-employed and teachers. “We realized there was nothing in the market that networked strangers together around their specialty or profession, so we focused there,” says Bianchini.
In addition to its enterprise partnerships, Mightybell powers 35,000 free networks today. Now it's launching a new service that gives individuals and small business owners—Bianchini calls them “community entrepreneurs”—the tools to build their own communities and businesses on the web and on native mobile apps. Mightybell’s customers can add their own branding, domain name, landing page; they can even charge for membership. Anyone can sign up and create a community for free. Bianchini is employing the same Freemium model Ning embraced in its earlier days to charge a moderate monthly fee for a more robust version of the software, or a more substantial fee for people who also want their own branded native app. (The company will also continue to offer enterprise-level service.)
Sure, local entrepreneurs could foster their communities of customers or supporters through groups on Facebook or LinkedIn, but they wouldn’t have the same access to data, or feature sets, or the ability to customize the networks to reflect their brands and eventually launch their own native apps. And they wouldn’t be able to sell advertising.
Early customers are people like Gerard Scarpaci and Randy Taylor, who run Hairbrained, a community for professional hairdressers. Scarpaci and Taylor started Hairbrained on Ning back in 2009. It was a hobby more than anything—and a good way to advertise their services as teachers. It worked well for them. They paid Ning $59 a month to host the network and brought in several hundred thousand dollars a year in sponsorship revenue. After a few years, however, they say Ning’s development stagnated, and they eventually began searching for other software to power their community. They paid web designers $8,000 to design a custom site and were about to have it built when they learned about Mightybell. On January 1, they relaunched Hairbrained using a beta version of Mightybell’s new service. In just one month, nearly 10 percent of their community has installed the app, and they use it to post photos of their work, connect with their peers, and keep up on industry news. So far, says Scarpaci, hairdressers love it and are spending more time on it than their old site. “We’re not technology people, but we’ve built this real community that is very valuable,” says Scarpaci. “We’re [on the phones] in 100,000 hairdressers’ pocket.”
In many ways, Mightybell is making good on the problem Bianchini set out to solve more than a decade ago when she and Andreessen founded Ning: It’s helping people and businesses build and nourish their own social networks. It’s not hard to imagine that had the Ning team not been subject to investor demands for the type of growth that justifies a bloated valuation, they would have been free to develop a very similar product. Certainly, they may have had more time. When I ask Bianchini about how the funding impacted her work at Ning, she thinks about it for awhile before saying that venture capital skewed Ning’s approach to pricing. “One of the things I took to Mightybell is when people want to pay you for your product, that allows you to make money from people who have the most vested.” By contrast, when you’re only worried about growth, choosing to worry about revenues after the fact, things can implode quickly.
